scmus-tutorial(7)
=================

## NAME

scmus tutorial

## Contents

Step 1: Starting scmus

Step 2: Adding Music to the Queue

Step 3: Controlling Playback

Step 4: Managing the Queue

Step 5: The Playlist Editor

Step 6: Find that Track

Step 7: Customization

Step 8: Quit

Step 9: Further Reading

## Step 1: Starting scmus

When you first launch scmus (just type *scmus* in a terminal and press Enter)
it will open to the `queue view`. This is where the current queue of tracks is
displayed.

## Step 2: Adding Music to the Queue

Press `1` to switch to the `library view`. You should see a list of playlists,
followed by a list of artists. Use the arrow keys or `hjkl` to navigate through
this list. To add music to the play queue, move the cursor over the desired
entry (this can be a playlist, artist, album or track, depending on where you
are in the hierarchy) and press `a`.

If you prefer to browse your library via the filesystem hierarchy, press `5`
to switch to the `browser view`. This view behaves identically to the
`library view`.

## Step 3: Controlling Playback

Press `3` to go back to the `queue view`. Use the up and down arrow keys or
`jk` to select a track you'd like to hear, and press Enter to play it. Here's
some keys to control play:

Press `c` to pause/unpause  
Press `right`/`left` to seek forwards/backwards 5 seconds  
Press `>`/`<` to seek forwards/backwards 1 minute  

scmus has some options to control what plays next (if anything) when the track
ends. The state of these settings are shown in the bottom right corner, and
may be toggled by pressing the corresponding key:

* `S` (`S`ingle):
  When this is on, mpd will stop playing at the end of the current track.

* `R` (`R`epeat):
  If this is on (and single is off), when mpd reaches the end of the queue it
  will start again from the beginning.

* `r` (`r`andom):
  When this is on, mpd will play tracks in a random order.

* `C` (`C`consume):
  When this is on, mpd will remove tracks from the queue when it finishes
  playing them.

## Step 4: Managing the Queue

Tracks in the queue may be moved by *marking* them with `spacebar`, and then
*pasting* them at the cursor with `p` or `P` (`p` moves tracks *after* the
cursor, whereas `P` moves them *under* the cursor). To remove a track from the
queue, select it and then press `d`. Multiple tracks can be deleted in one
operation by *marking* them and then pressing `d`. To remove all tracks from
the queue, press `D`.

## Step 5: The Playlist Editor

Press `1` to switch to the `library view`, and then locate some tracks that
you would like to add to a playlist. With the tracks selected, press `A` to
add them to a playlist. If there is no playlist currently loaded into the
editor, you will be prompted to enter the name for a new playlist.

Press `2` to switch to the `playlist view`. The tracks you just added should
be listed here, similar to how they appear in the `queue view`. In fact, all
of the queue management keybindings work identically in the `playlist view`,
with the exception that `D` unloads the playlist rather than removing tracks
from it.

When you are done editing your playlist, you can load it to the play queue by
selecting it in the `library` or `browser view` and pressing `a`.

## Step 6: Find that Track

On any view, press `/` to enter `search mode`. You may then enter a search
query on the `command line` (the bottom line) to search the current view. Press
`Enter` after typing your query, and then press `n` and `N` to repeat the
search forward and backward respectively using the same query.

Press `4` to switch to the `search view`. In this view, you can search for
tracks in the mpd database. Press `i` to begin editing the first parameter of
your query. This can be a simple keyword, or a metadata-constrained parameter
such as *artist:boris*.

Press `a` to add another parameter to the search, then select it and press `i`
again to edit it. The results returned for the search query will be the logical
*AND* of all the parameters.

To remove a parameter, select it and press `d`.

Finally, press `Enter` to execute the search. The search results will be
*appended* to the list below the line which reads *Results*. Add tracks to the
play queue by selecting them and pressing `a`. Remove tracks from the results
by selecting them and pressing `d`, or press `D` to remove all tracks from the
results list.

## Step 7: Customization

scmus has some settings that you can tweak, like changing the way tracks are
displayed or changing the keybindings.

Press `7` to switch to `options view`. Here you can view and edit the
customizable options in scmus. Select an option and press `i` to begin editing
it. Press `Enter` when you are done.

Press `8` to switch to `bindings view`. Here you can view and edit the key
bindings. Press `i` with a binding selected to begin editing it. Press `Enter`
when you are finished editing.

Please note that options and key bindings changed within scmus itself are in
effect only for the current session (they are not saved). You must create a
configuration file in order to permanently change the settings.

See scmus(1) for a description of the options in scmus, and scmus(3)
for a list of functions which may be used in key bindings.

## Step 8: Quit

When you're done, press `q` and then `y` to quit.

## Step 9: Further Reading

scmus comes with a general reference manual as well as a programming reference.
Now that you've got the basics down they should be intelligible. Try `man scmus`
in a terminal to view the general program reference, or `man 3 scmus` to see
the programming reference.
